docs/how-to/column-names.rst, before:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to validate column names.
    :keywords: datatest, column names, columns, fieldnames


############################
How to Validate Column Names
############################

To validate column names, we need pass the names as they appear and
the names we're expecting to the :func:`validate` function (or the
:meth:`assertValid() <DataTestCase.assertValid>` method if we're
writing unittest-style tests).


=============
Some Examples
=============

**Selector:** The columns names of a :class:`datatest.Selector` can be
accessed with the :attr:`fieldnames <Selector.fieldnames>` attribute.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pytest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 11

            from datatest import validate
            from datatest import Selector


            def test_columns():

                mydata = Selector('mydata.csv')

                required_columns = {'A', 'B', 'C'}

                validate(mydata.fieldnames, required_columns)


    .. group-tab:: Unittest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 13

            from datatest import DataTestCase
            from datatest import Selector


            class TestMyData(DataTestCase):

                def test_columns(self):

                    mydata = Selector('mydata.csv')

                    required_columns = {'A', 'B', 'C'}

                    self.assertValid(mydata.fieldnames, required_columns)


**DataFrame:** The columns names of a ``pandas.DataFrame`` can be
accessed with the ``columns`` attribute.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pytest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 11

            import pandas as pd
            import datatest as dt


            def test_columns():

                mydata = pd.read_csv('mydata.csv')  # <- Creates DataFrame.

                required_columns = {'A', 'B', 'C'}

                validate(mydata.columns, required_columns)

    .. group-tab:: Unittest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 13

            import pandas as pd
            import datatest as dt


            class TestMyData(dt.DataTestCase):

                def test_columns(self):

                    mydata = pd.read_csv('mydata.csv')  # <- Creates DataFrame.

                    required_columns = {'A', 'B', 'C'}

                    self.assertValid(mydata.columns, required_columns)


==============
Other Criteria
==============

The examples above check that the column names are members of a given
:py:class:`set`. But because sets are unordered, we are not validating
the order of these columns---only that they exist.

**Column Order:** If we want to validate the order the columns, we
can use a :py:class:`list` of ``required_columns`` (instead instead of
a set).

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pytest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 9

            from datatest import validate
            from datatest import Selector


            def test_columns():

                mydata = Selector('mydata.csv')

                required_columns = ['A', 'B', 'C']  # <- Checks order.

                validate(mydata.fieldnames, required_columns)


    .. group-tab:: Unittest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 11

            from datatest import DataTestCase
            from datatest import Selector


            class TestMyData(DataTestCase):

                def test_columns(self):

                    mydata = Selector('mydata.csv')

                    required_columns = ['A', 'B', 'C']  # <- Checks order.

                    self.assertValid(mydata.fieldnames, required_columns)


**Column Format:** If we don't care exactly what the column names are
but we want to check that they conform to a specific format, we can use
a predicate **function**:

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pytest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 9-11

            from datatest import validate
            from datatest import Selector


            def test_columns():

                mydata = Selector('mydata.csv')

                def required_format(value):
                    """must be upper case"""
                    return value.isupper()

                validate(mydata.fieldnames, required_format)

    .. group-tab:: Unittest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 11-13

            from datatest import DataTestCase
            from datatest import Selector


            class TestMyData(DataTestCase):

                def test_columns(self):

                    mydata = Selector('mydata.csv')

                    def required_format(value):
                        """must be upper case"""
                        return value.isupper()

                    self.assertValid(mydata.fieldnames, required_format)

Commit message:

Change name of "Selector" class to "Select".
Dropping the "or" is more consistent with the other data
handling class names (Query and Result). Also, instances
of this class are called like a function and it's natural
to name them "select", so it makes sense that the class
name would mirror this.

docs/how-to/column-names.rst, after:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to validate column names.
    :keywords: datatest, column names, columns, fieldnames


############################
How to Validate Column Names
############################

To validate column names, we need pass the names as they appear and
the names we're expecting to the :func:`validate` function (or the
:meth:`assertValid() <DataTestCase.assertValid>` method if we're
writing unittest-style tests).


=============
Some Examples
=============

**Select:** The columns names of a :class:`datatest.Select` can be
accessed with the :attr:`fieldnames <Select.fieldnames>` attribute.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pytest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 11

            from datatest import validate
            from datatest import Select


            def test_columns():

                mydata = Select('mydata.csv')

                required_columns = {'A', 'B', 'C'}

                validate(mydata.fieldnames, required_columns)


    .. group-tab:: Unittest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 13

            from datatest import DataTestCase
            from datatest import Select


            class TestMyData(DataTestCase):

                def test_columns(self):

                    mydata = Select('mydata.csv')

                    required_columns = {'A', 'B', 'C'}

                    self.assertValid(mydata.fieldnames, required_columns)


**DataFrame:** The columns names of a ``pandas.DataFrame`` can be
accessed with the ``columns`` attribute.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pytest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 11

            import pandas as pd
            import datatest as dt


            def test_columns():

                mydata = pd.read_csv('mydata.csv')  # <- Creates DataFrame.

                required_columns = {'A', 'B', 'C'}

                validate(mydata.columns, required_columns)

    .. group-tab:: Unittest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 13

            import pandas as pd
            import datatest as dt


            class TestMyData(dt.DataTestCase):

                def test_columns(self):

                    mydata = pd.read_csv('mydata.csv')  # <- Creates DataFrame.

                    required_columns = {'A', 'B', 'C'}

                    self.assertValid(mydata.columns, required_columns)


==============
Other Criteria
==============

The examples above check that the column names are members of a given
:py:class:`set`. But because sets are unordered, we are not validating
the order of these columns---only that they exist.

**Column Order:** If we want to validate the order the columns, we
can use a :py:class:`list` of ``required_columns`` (instead instead of
a set).

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pytest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 9

            from datatest import validate
            from datatest import Select


            def test_columns():

                mydata = Select('mydata.csv')

                required_columns = ['A', 'B', 'C']  # <- Checks order.

                validate(mydata.fieldnames, required_columns)


    .. group-tab:: Unittest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 11

            from datatest import DataTestCase
            from datatest import Select


            class TestMyData(DataTestCase):

                def test_columns(self):

                    mydata = Select('mydata.csv')

                    required_columns = ['A', 'B', 'C']  # <- Checks order.

                    self.assertValid(mydata.fieldnames, required_columns)


**Column Format:** If we don't care exactly what the column names are
but we want to check that they conform to a specific format, we can use
a predicate **function**:

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pytest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 9-11

            from datatest import validate
            from datatest import Select


            def test_columns():

                mydata = Select('mydata.csv')

                def required_format(value):
                    """must be upper case"""
                    return value.isupper()

                validate(mydata.fieldnames, required_format)

    .. group-tab:: Unittest

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 11-13

            from datatest import DataTestCase
            from datatest import Select


            class TestMyData(DataTestCase):

                def test_columns(self):

                    mydata = Select('mydata.csv')

                    def required_format(value):
                        """must be upper case"""
                        return value.isupper()

                    self.assertValid(mydata.fieldnames, required_format)
