docs/how-to/date-time-str.rst, before:


.. currentmodule:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to validate date formats.
    :keywords: datatest, date format, validate, validation


#####################################
How to Validate Date and Time Strings
#####################################

To validate date and time formats, we can define a helper function that
uses `strftime codes`_ to check for matching strings.

In the following example, we use the code ``%Y-%m-%d`` to check for
dates that match the pattern YYYY-MM-DD:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 17

    from datetime import datetime
    from datatest import validate


    def strftime_format(format):
        def func(value):
            try:
                datetime.strptime(value, format)
            except ValueError:
                return False
            return True
        func.__doc__ = f'should use date format {format}'
        return func


    data = ['2020-02-29', '03-17-2021', '2021-02-29', '2021-04-01']
    validate(data, strftime_format('%Y-%m-%d'))


Date strings that don't match the required format are flagged as
:class:`Invalid`:

.. code-block:: none

    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "example.py", line 17, in <module>
        validate(data, strftime_format('%Y-%m-%d'))
    datatest.ValidationError: should use date format %Y-%m-%d (2 differences): [
        Invalid('03-17-2021'),
        Invalid('2021-02-29'),
    ]

Above, the date ``03-17-2021`` doesn't match because it's not well-formed
and ``2021-02-29`` doesn't match because 2021 is not a leap-year so it has
no February 29th.


Strftime Codes for Common Formats
=================================

You can use the following **format codes** with the function
defined earlier to validate many common date and time formats
(e.g., ``strftime_format('%d %B %Y')``):

========================  =========================  ========================
format codes              description                example
========================  =========================  ========================
``%Y-%m-%d``              YYYY-MM-DD                 2021-03-17
``%m/%d/%Y``              MM/DD/YYYY                 3/17/2021
``%d/%m/%Y``              DD/MM/YYYY                 17/03/2021
``%d.%m.%Y``              DD.MM.YYYY                 17.03.2021
``%d %B %Y``              DD Month YYYY              17 March 2021
``%b %d, %Y``             Mnth DD, YYYY              Mar 17, 2021
``%a %b %d %H:%M:%S %Y``  WkDay Mnth DD H:M:S YYYY   Wed Mar 17 19:42:50 2021
``%I:%M %p``              12-hour time               7:42 PM
``%H:%M:%S``              24-hour time with seconds  19:42:50
========================  =========================  ========================

In Python's :py:mod:`datetime` module, see `strftime() and strptime() Format Codes`_
for all supported codes.

.. _`strftime codes`: https://docs.python.org/library/datetime.html#strftime-and-strptime-format-codes
.. _`strftime() and strptime() Format Codes`: https://docs.python.org/library/datetime.html#strftime-and-strptime-format-codes

Commit message:

Add footnote to explain locale differences of "%p" code (AM/PM).

docs/how-to/date-time-str.rst, after:


.. currentmodule:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to validate date formats.
    :keywords: datatest, date format, validate, validation


#####################################
How to Validate Date and Time Strings
#####################################

To validate date and time formats, we can define a helper function that
uses `strftime codes`_ to check for matching strings.

In the following example, we use the code ``%Y-%m-%d`` to check for
dates that match the pattern YYYY-MM-DD:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 17

    from datetime import datetime
    from datatest import validate


    def strftime_format(format):
        def func(value):
            try:
                datetime.strptime(value, format)
            except ValueError:
                return False
            return True
        func.__doc__ = f'should use date format {format}'
        return func


    data = ['2020-02-29', '03-17-2021', '2021-02-29', '2021-04-01']
    validate(data, strftime_format('%Y-%m-%d'))


Date strings that don't match the required format are flagged as
:class:`Invalid`:

.. code-block:: none

    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "example.py", line 17, in <module>
        validate(data, strftime_format('%Y-%m-%d'))
    datatest.ValidationError: should use date format %Y-%m-%d (2 differences): [
        Invalid('03-17-2021'),
        Invalid('2021-02-29'),
    ]

Above, the date ``03-17-2021`` doesn't match because it's not well-formed
and ``2021-02-29`` doesn't match because 2021 is not a leap-year so it has
no February 29th.


Strftime Codes for Common Formats
=================================

You can use the following **format codes** with the function
defined earlier to validate many common date and time formats
(e.g., ``strftime_format('%d %B %Y')``):

========================  =========================  ========================
format codes              description                example
========================  =========================  ========================
``%Y-%m-%d``              YYYY-MM-DD                 2021-03-17
``%m/%d/%Y``              MM/DD/YYYY                 3/17/2021
``%d/%m/%Y``              DD/MM/YYYY                 17/03/2021
``%d.%m.%Y``              DD.MM.YYYY                 17.03.2021
``%d %B %Y``              DD Month YYYY              17 March 2021
``%b %d, %Y``             Mnth DD, YYYY              Mar 17, 2021
``%a %b %d %H:%M:%S %Y``  WkDay Mnth DD H:M:S YYYY   Wed Mar 17 19:42:50 2021
``%I:%M %p``              12-hour time               7:42 PM [1]_
``%H:%M:%S``              24-hour time with seconds  19:42:50
========================  =========================  ========================

In Python's :py:mod:`datetime` module, see `strftime() and strptime() Format Codes`_
for all supported codes.

.. _`strftime codes`: https://docs.python.org/library/datetime.html#strftime-and-strptime-format-codes
.. _`strftime() and strptime() Format Codes`: https://docs.python.org/library/datetime.html#strftime-and-strptime-format-codes


.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [1] The code ``%p`` expects the system locale's equivalent of AM or PM.
       For example, the locale ``en_US`` uses "AM" and "PM" while the locale
       ``de_DE`` uses "am" and "pm".
