docs/how-to/fuzzy-matches.rst, before:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to assert fuzzy matches.
    :keywords: testing, fuzzy match, datatest


###########################
How to Assert Fuzzy Matches
###########################

When comparing strings of text, it may be necessary to assert that
values are similar even though they are not exactly the same. To do
this, we define an assertion that implements approximate string
matching (also called fuzzy matching):

.. code-block:: python

    import difflib
    import datatest


    class FuzzyTestCase(datatest.DataTestCase):
        def assertFuzzy(self, data, requirement, cutoff=0.6, msg=None):
            """Assert that measures of string similarity are greater than
            or equal to *cutoff*.

            Similarity measures are determined using the ratio() method
            of the difflib.SequenceMatcher class and range from 1.0 (exactly
            the same) to 0.0 (completely different).
            """
            class FuzzyMatcher(str):
                def __eq__(inner_self, other):
                    if not isinstance(other, str):
                        return NotImplemented
                    matcher = difflib.SequenceMatcher(a=inner_self, b=other)
                    return matcher.ratio() >= cutoff  # <- closes over cutoff

            func = lambda x: FuzzyMatcher(x) if isinstance(x, str) else x
            requirement = datatest.DataQuery.from_object(requirement).map(func)

            msg = msg or 'string similarity of {0} or higher'.format(cutoff)
            self.assertValid(data, requirement, msg)
    ...


Tests that inherit from ``FuzzyTestCase``, can use the ``assertFuzzy()``
method to assert approximate string matches:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 15

    ...

    class TestFuzzy(FuzzyTestCase):
        def test_assertion(self):
            scraped_data = {
                'MKT-GA4530': '4 1/2 inch Angle Grinder',
                'FLK-87-5': 'Fluke 87 5 Multimeter',
                'LEW-K2698-1': 'Lincoln Electric Easy MIG 180',
            }
            catalog_reference = {
                'MKT-GA4530': '4-1/2in Angle Grinder',
                'FLK-87-5': 'Fluke 87-5 Multimeter',
                'LEW-K2698-1': 'Lincoln Easy MIG 180',
            }
            self.assertFuzzy(scraped_data, catalog_reference, 0.75)


    if __name__ == '__main__':
        datatest.main()


**********************
Allowing Fuzzy Matches
**********************

While it's usually more efficient to assert approximate matches and
allow specific differences, it may be appropriate to allow approximate
matches in certain cases. The ``FuzzyTestCase`` class can be extended
with an ``allowedFuzzy()`` method for this purpose:

.. code-block:: python

    class FuzzyTestCase(datatest.DataTestCase):
        ...

        def allowedFuzzy(self, cutoff=0.6, msg=None):
            """Allows Invalid differences whose measures of similarity are
            greater than or equal to *cutoff*

            Similarity measures are determined using the ratio() method
            of the difflib.SequenceMatcher class and range from 1.0 (exactly
            the same) to 0.0 (completely different).
            """
            def fuzzy_match(invalid, expected):
                matcher = difflib.SequenceMatcher(a=expected, b=invalid)
                return matcher.ratio() >= cutoff  # <- closes over cutoff
            msg = msg or 'string similarity of {0} or higher'.format(cutoff)
            return self.allowedInvalid() & self.allowedArgs(fuzzy_match, msg)

Commit message:

Reword "Allowing Fuzzy Matches" documentation to improve readability.

docs/how-to/fuzzy-matches.rst, after:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to assert fuzzy matches.
    :keywords: testing, fuzzy match, datatest


###########################
How to Assert Fuzzy Matches
###########################

When comparing strings of text, it may be necessary to assert that
values are similar even though they are not exactly the same. To do
this, we define an assertion that implements approximate string
matching (also called fuzzy matching):

.. code-block:: python

    import difflib
    import datatest


    class FuzzyTestCase(datatest.DataTestCase):
        def assertFuzzy(self, data, requirement, cutoff=0.6, msg=None):
            """Assert that measures of string similarity are greater than
            or equal to *cutoff*.

            Similarity measures are determined using the ratio() method
            of the difflib.SequenceMatcher class and range from 1.0 (exactly
            the same) to 0.0 (completely different).
            """
            class FuzzyMatcher(str):
                def __eq__(inner_self, other):
                    if not isinstance(other, str):
                        return NotImplemented
                    matcher = difflib.SequenceMatcher(a=inner_self, b=other)
                    return matcher.ratio() >= cutoff  # <- closes over cutoff

            func = lambda x: FuzzyMatcher(x) if isinstance(x, str) else x
            requirement = datatest.DataQuery.from_object(requirement).map(func)

            msg = msg or 'string similarity of {0} or higher'.format(cutoff)
            self.assertValid(data, requirement, msg)
    ...


Tests that inherit from ``FuzzyTestCase``, can use the ``assertFuzzy()``
method to assert approximate string matches:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 15

    ...

    class TestFuzzy(FuzzyTestCase):
        def test_assertion(self):
            scraped_data = {
                'MKT-GA4530': '4 1/2 inch Angle Grinder',
                'FLK-87-5': 'Fluke 87 5 Multimeter',
                'LEW-K2698-1': 'Lincoln Electric Easy MIG 180',
            }
            catalog_reference = {
                'MKT-GA4530': '4-1/2in Angle Grinder',
                'FLK-87-5': 'Fluke 87-5 Multimeter',
                'LEW-K2698-1': 'Lincoln Easy MIG 180',
            }
            self.assertFuzzy(scraped_data, catalog_reference, 0.75)


    if __name__ == '__main__':
        datatest.main()


**********************
Allowing Fuzzy Matches
**********************

While it's usually more efficient to assert approximate matches and
allow specific differences, it may be appropriate to allow approximate
differences in certain cases. The ``FuzzyTestCase`` class can be
extended with an ``allowedFuzzy()`` method for this purpose:

.. code-block:: python

    class FuzzyTestCase(datatest.DataTestCase):
        ...

        def allowedFuzzy(self, cutoff=0.6, msg=None):
            """Allows Invalid differences whose measures of similarity are
            greater than or equal to *cutoff*

            Similarity measures are determined using the ratio() method
            of the difflib.SequenceMatcher class and range from 1.0 (exactly
            the same) to 0.0 (completely different).
            """
            def approx_diff(invalid, expected):
                matcher = difflib.SequenceMatcher(a=expected, b=invalid)
                return matcher.ratio() >= cutoff  # <- closes over cutoff
            msg = msg or 'string similarity of {0} or higher'.format(cutoff)
            return self.allowedInvalid() & self.allowedArgs(approx_diff, msg)
