docs/how-to/nan-values.rst, before:


.. currentmodule:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to deal with NaN values.
    :keywords: datatest, NaN, not a number, np.nan, math.nan


###########################
How to Deal With NaN Values
###########################

.. sidebar:: IEEE 754

    While the behavior of NaN values can seem strange, it's actually
    the result of an intentionally designed specification. The behavior
    was standardized in :abbr:`IEEE 754 (IEEE Standard for Floating-Point
    Arithmetic)`, a technical standards document first published in
    1985 and implemented by many popular programming languages (including
    Python).

When checking certain types of data, you may encounter NaN values.
Working with NaNs can be frustrating because they don't always act
as one might expect.

About NaN values:

* NaN is short for "Not a Number".
* NaN values represent undefined or unrepresentable results
  from certain mathematical operations.
* Mathematical operations involving a NaN will either return a
  NaN or raise an exception.
* Comparisons involving a NaN will return False.


Accepting NaN Differences
=========================

If validation fails and returns NaN differences, you can accept
them as you would any other difference:

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Using Acceptance

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 8

            from math import nan
            from datatest import validate, accepted, Extra


            data = [5, 6, float('nan')]
            requirement = {5, 6}

            with accepted(Extra(nan)):
                validate(data, requirement)


    .. group-tab:: No Acceptance

        .. code-block:: python

            from math import nan
            from datatest import validate


            data = [5, 6, float('nan')]
            requirement = {5, 6}

            validate(data, requirement)


        .. code-block:: none
            :emphasize-lines: 5

            Traceback (most recent call last):
              File "example.py", line 8, in <module>
                validate(data, requirement)
            datatest.ValidationError: does not satisfy set membership (1 difference): [
                Extra(nan),
            ]


Like other values, NaNs can also be accepted as part of a list,
set, or mapping of differences:

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Using Acceptance

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 8

            from math import nan
            from datatest import validate, accepted, Missing, Extra


            data = [5, 6, float('nan')]
            requirement = {5, 6, 7}

            with accepted([Missing(7), Extra(nan)]):
                validate(data, requirement)


    .. group-tab:: No Acceptance

        .. code-block:: python

            from math import nan
            from datatest import validate


            data = [5, 6, float('nan')]
            requirement = {5, 6, 7}

            validate(data, requirement)


        .. code-block:: none
            :emphasize-lines: 5-6

            Traceback (most recent call last):
              File "example.py", line 8, in <module>
                validate(data, requirement)
            datatest.ValidationError: does not satisfy set membership (2 differences): [
                Missing(7),
                Extra(nan),
            ]


.. note::

    The :py:data:`math.nan` value is new in Python 3.5. NaN values can
    also be created in any Python version using ``float('nan')``.


Dropping NaNs Before Validation
===============================

Sometimes it's OK to ignore NaN values entirely. If this is
appropriate in your circumstance, you can simply remove all
NaN records and validate the remaining data.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pandas Example

        If you're using Pandas, you can call the |Series.dropna| and
        |DataFrame.dropna| methods to drop records that contain NaN
        values:

        .. |Series.dropna| replace:: :meth:`Series.dropna() <pandas.Series.dropna>`
        .. |DataFrame.dropna| replace:: :meth:`DataFrame.dropna() <pandas.DataFrame.dropna>`

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 6

            import pandas as pd
            from datatest import validate


            data = pd.Series([1, 1, 2, 2, float('nan')])
            data = data.dropna()  # Drop NaN valued elements.
            requirement = {1, 2}

            validate(data, requirement)


    .. group-tab:: Non-Pandas Example

        In this example, we use the Standard Library's :py:func:`math.isnan`
        in a list comprehension to drop NaN values from our data:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 6

            from math import isnan
            from datatest import validate


            data = [1, 1, 2, 2, float('nan')]
            data = [x for x in data if not isnan(x)]  # Keep values if not NaN.

            requirement = {1, 2}

            validate(data, requirement)


Validating NaN Values
=====================

You may want to check that NaNs are part of a required set instead
of accepting them as differences. The most robust way to do this is
by replacing NaN values with a special token before validation. Using
NaN values directly can be frought with problems and should usually
be avoided.

Below, we define a custom ``NanToken`` object and use it to replace
actual NaN values.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pandas Example

        If you're using Pandas, you can call the |Series.fillna| and
        |DataFrame.fillna| methods to replace NaNs with a different value:

        .. |Series.fillna| replace:: :meth:`Series.fillna() <pandas.Series.fillna>`
        .. |DataFrame.fillna| replace:: :meth:`DataFrame.fillna() <pandas.DataFrame.fillna>`

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 13

            import pandas as pd
            from datatest import validate


            class NanToken(object):
                def __repr__(self):
                    return self.__class__.__name__

            NanToken = NanToken()


            data = pd.Series([1, 1, 2, 2, float('nan')])
            data = data.fillna(NanToken)  # Replace NaNs with NanToken.

            requirement = {1, 2, NanToken}

            validate(data, requirement)


    .. group-tab:: Non-Pandas Example

        In this example, we use a list comprehension and helper function
        to replace NaN values in our list of data elements:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 19

            from math import isnan
            from datatest import validate


            class NanToken(object):
                def __repr__(self):
                    return self.__class__.__name__

            NanToken = NanToken()


            def replace_nan(x):  # <- Helper function.
                if isnan(x):
                    return NanToken
                return x


            data = [1, 1, 2, 2, float('nan')]
            data = [replace_nan(x) for x in data]  # Replace NaNs with NanToken.

            requirement = {1, 2, NanToken}

            validate(data, requirement)


A Deeper Understanding
======================

Equality: NaN ≠ NaN
-------------------

NaN values don't compare as equal to anything---even themselves::

    >>> x = float('nan')
    >>> x == x
    False


To check if a value is NaN, it's common for modules and packages
to provide a function for this purpose (e.g., :py:func:`math.isnan`,
:obj:`numpy.isnan() <numpy.isnan>`, :func:`pandas.isna`, etc.)::

    >>> import math
    >>> x = float('nan')
    >>> math.isnan(x)
    True


While NaN values cannot be compared directly, they *can* be compared
as part of a difference object. In fact, difference comparisons treat
all NaN values as equal---even when the underlying type is different::

    >>> import decimal, math, numpy
    >>> from datatest import Invalid

    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(float('nan'))
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(complex('nan'))
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(decimal.Decimal('nan'))
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(numpy.nan)
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(numpy.float32('nan'))
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(numpy.float64('nan'))
    True


Identity: NaN is NaN, Except When it Isn't
------------------------------------------

Some packages provide a NaN constant that can be referenced in
user code (e.g., :py:data:`math.nan` and :py:data:`numpy.nan`).
While it may be tempting to use these constants to check for
matching NaN values, this approach is not reliable in practice.

To optimize performance, Numpy and Pandas must strictly manage the
memory layouts of the data they contain. When :data:`numpy.nan` is
inserted into an :class:`ndarray <numpy.ndarray>` or :class:`Series
<pandas.Series>`, the value is coerced into a compatible ``dtype``
when necessary. When a NaN's type is coerced, a separate instance
is created and the ability to match using the ``is`` operator
no longer works as you might expect::

    >>> import pandas as pd
    >>> import numpy as np

    >>> np.nan is np.nan
    True

    >>> s = pd.Series([10, 11, np.nan])
    >>> s[2]
    nan
    >>> s[2] is np.nan
    False


We can verify that the types are now different:

    >>> type(np.nan)
    float
    >>> type(s[2])
    float64

Generally speaking, it is not safe to assume that NaN is NaN.
This means that---for reliable validation---it's best to remove
NaN records entirely or replace them with some other value.

Commit message:

Update "Requiring NaN Values" introduction paragraph.

docs/how-to/nan-values.rst, after:


.. currentmodule:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to deal with NaN values.
    :keywords: datatest, NaN, not a number, np.nan, math.nan


###########################
How to Deal With NaN Values
###########################

.. sidebar:: IEEE 754

    While the behavior of NaN values can seem strange, it's actually
    the result of an intentionally designed specification. The behavior
    was standardized in :abbr:`IEEE 754 (IEEE Standard for Floating-Point
    Arithmetic)`, a technical standards document first published in
    1985 and implemented by many popular programming languages (including
    Python).

When checking certain types of data, you may encounter NaN values.
Working with NaNs can be frustrating because they don't always act
as one might expect.

About NaN values:

* NaN is short for "Not a Number".
* NaN values represent undefined or unrepresentable results
  from certain mathematical operations.
* Mathematical operations involving a NaN will either return a
  NaN or raise an exception.
* Comparisons involving a NaN will return False.


Accepting NaN Differences
=========================

If validation fails and returns NaN differences, you can accept
them as you would any other difference:

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Using Acceptance

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 8

            from math import nan
            from datatest import validate, accepted, Extra


            data = [5, 6, float('nan')]
            requirement = {5, 6}

            with accepted(Extra(nan)):
                validate(data, requirement)


    .. group-tab:: No Acceptance

        .. code-block:: python

            from math import nan
            from datatest import validate


            data = [5, 6, float('nan')]
            requirement = {5, 6}

            validate(data, requirement)


        .. code-block:: none
            :emphasize-lines: 5

            Traceback (most recent call last):
              File "example.py", line 8, in <module>
                validate(data, requirement)
            datatest.ValidationError: does not satisfy set membership (1 difference): [
                Extra(nan),
            ]


Like other values, NaNs can also be accepted as part of a list,
set, or mapping of differences:

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Using Acceptance

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 8

            from math import nan
            from datatest import validate, accepted, Missing, Extra


            data = [5, 6, float('nan')]
            requirement = {5, 6, 7}

            with accepted([Missing(7), Extra(nan)]):
                validate(data, requirement)


    .. group-tab:: No Acceptance

        .. code-block:: python

            from math import nan
            from datatest import validate


            data = [5, 6, float('nan')]
            requirement = {5, 6, 7}

            validate(data, requirement)


        .. code-block:: none
            :emphasize-lines: 5-6

            Traceback (most recent call last):
              File "example.py", line 8, in <module>
                validate(data, requirement)
            datatest.ValidationError: does not satisfy set membership (2 differences): [
                Missing(7),
                Extra(nan),
            ]


.. note::

    The :py:data:`math.nan` value is new in Python 3.5. NaN values can
    also be created in any Python version using ``float('nan')``.


Dropping NaNs Before Validation
===============================

Sometimes it's OK to ignore NaN values entirely. If this is
appropriate in your circumstance, you can simply remove all
NaN records and validate the remaining data.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pandas Example

        If you're using Pandas, you can call the |Series.dropna| and
        |DataFrame.dropna| methods to drop records that contain NaN
        values:

        .. |Series.dropna| replace:: :meth:`Series.dropna() <pandas.Series.dropna>`
        .. |DataFrame.dropna| replace:: :meth:`DataFrame.dropna() <pandas.DataFrame.dropna>`

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 6

            import pandas as pd
            from datatest import validate


            data = pd.Series([1, 1, 2, 2, float('nan')])
            data = data.dropna()  # Drop NaN valued elements.
            requirement = {1, 2}

            validate(data, requirement)


    .. group-tab:: Non-Pandas Example

        In this example, we use the Standard Library's :py:func:`math.isnan`
        in a list comprehension to drop NaN values from our data:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 6

            from math import isnan
            from datatest import validate


            data = [1, 1, 2, 2, float('nan')]
            data = [x for x in data if not isnan(x)]  # Keep values if not NaN.

            requirement = {1, 2}

            validate(data, requirement)


Requiring NaN Values
=====================

If necessary, it's possible to require that NaNs appear in your
*data*. But putting NaN values directly into a *requirement* can
be frought with problems and should usually be avoided. The most
robust way to do this is by replacing NaN values with a special
token and then requiring the token.

Below, we define a custom ``NanToken`` object and use it to replace
actual NaN values.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Pandas Example

        If you're using Pandas, you can call the |Series.fillna| and
        |DataFrame.fillna| methods to replace NaNs with a different value:

        .. |Series.fillna| replace:: :meth:`Series.fillna() <pandas.Series.fillna>`
        .. |DataFrame.fillna| replace:: :meth:`DataFrame.fillna() <pandas.DataFrame.fillna>`

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 13

            import pandas as pd
            from datatest import validate


            class NanToken(object):
                def __repr__(self):
                    return self.__class__.__name__

            NanToken = NanToken()


            data = pd.Series([1, 1, 2, 2, float('nan')])
            data = data.fillna(NanToken)  # Replace NaNs with NanToken.

            requirement = {1, 2, NanToken}

            validate(data, requirement)


    .. group-tab:: Non-Pandas Example

        In this example, we use a list comprehension and helper function
        to replace NaN values in our list of data elements:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 19

            from math import isnan
            from datatest import validate


            class NanToken(object):
                def __repr__(self):
                    return self.__class__.__name__

            NanToken = NanToken()


            def replace_nan(x):  # <- Helper function.
                if isnan(x):
                    return NanToken
                return x


            data = [1, 1, 2, 2, float('nan')]
            data = [replace_nan(x) for x in data]  # Replace NaNs with NanToken.

            requirement = {1, 2, NanToken}

            validate(data, requirement)


A Deeper Understanding
======================

Equality: NaN ≠ NaN
-------------------

NaN values don't compare as equal to anything---even themselves::

    >>> x = float('nan')
    >>> x == x
    False


To check if a value is NaN, it's common for modules and packages
to provide a function for this purpose (e.g., :py:func:`math.isnan`,
:obj:`numpy.isnan() <numpy.isnan>`, :func:`pandas.isna`, etc.)::

    >>> import math
    >>> x = float('nan')
    >>> math.isnan(x)
    True


While NaN values cannot be compared directly, they *can* be compared
as part of a difference object. In fact, difference comparisons treat
all NaN values as equal---even when the underlying type is different::

    >>> import decimal, math, numpy
    >>> from datatest import Invalid

    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(float('nan'))
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(complex('nan'))
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(decimal.Decimal('nan'))
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(numpy.nan)
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(numpy.float32('nan'))
    True
    >>> Invalid(math.nan) == Invalid(numpy.float64('nan'))
    True


Identity: NaN is NaN, Except When it Isn't
------------------------------------------

Some packages provide a NaN constant that can be referenced in
user code (e.g., :py:data:`math.nan` and :py:data:`numpy.nan`).
While it may be tempting to use these constants to check for
matching NaN values, this approach is not reliable in practice.

To optimize performance, Numpy and Pandas must strictly manage the
memory layouts of the data they contain. When :data:`numpy.nan` is
inserted into an :class:`ndarray <numpy.ndarray>` or :class:`Series
<pandas.Series>`, the value is coerced into a compatible ``dtype``
when necessary. When a NaN's type is coerced, a separate instance
is created and the ability to match using the ``is`` operator
no longer works as you might expect::

    >>> import pandas as pd
    >>> import numpy as np

    >>> np.nan is np.nan
    True

    >>> s = pd.Series([10, 11, np.nan])
    >>> s[2]
    nan
    >>> s[2] is np.nan
    False


We can verify that the types are now different:

    >>> type(np.nan)
    float
    >>> type(s[2])
    float64

Generally speaking, it is not safe to assume that NaN is NaN.
This means that---for reliable validation---it's best to remove
NaN records entirely or replace them with some other value.
