docs/how-to/reorder-acceptances.rst, before:


.. py:currentmodule:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to re-order acceptances.
    :keywords: datatest, order of operations, acceptance, order


###########################
How to Re-Order Acceptances
###########################

Individual acceptances can be combined together to create new acceptances
with narrower or broader criteria (see :ref:`composability-docs`).
When acceptances are combined, their criteria are applied in an order
determined by their scope. Element-wise criteria are applied first,
group-wise criteria are applied second, and whole-error criteria are
applied last (see :ref:`order-of-operations-docs`).


Implicit Ordering
-----------------

In this first example, ``accepted([Missing('A'), ...])`` (a group-wise
acceptance) is applied first and ``accepted.count()`` (a whole-error
acceptance) is applied second::

    with accepted.count(4) | accepted([Missing('A'), Missing('B')]):
        ...


Explicit Ordering
-----------------

If you want to control this order explicitly, you can use nested
``with`` statements to change the default behavior::

    with accepted([Missing('A'), Missing('B')]):
        with accepted.count(4):
            ...

Using nested ``with`` statements, the inner-most block is applied
first and outer blocks are applied in order until the outer-most
block is applied last.

Commit message:

Add fuller explanations to "Re-Order Acceptances" docs.

docs/how-to/reorder-acceptances.rst, after:


.. py:currentmodule:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: How to re-order acceptances.
    :keywords: datatest, order of operations, acceptance, order


###########################
How to Re-Order Acceptances
###########################

Individual acceptances can be combined together to create new acceptances
with narrower or broader criteria (see :ref:`composability-docs`).
When acceptances are combined, their criteria are applied in an order
determined by their scope. Element-wise criteria are applied first,
group-wise criteria are applied second, and whole-error criteria are
applied last (see :ref:`order-of-operations-docs`).


Implicit Ordering
-----------------

In this first example, we have a combined acceptance made from a
whole-error acceptance, :func:`accepted.count`, and a group-wise
acceptance, :func:`accepted([...]) <accepted>`:

.. code-block:: python

    with accepted.count(4) | accepted([Missing('A'), Missing('B')]):
        ...

Since the :ref:`order-of-operations-docs` specifies that whole-error
acceptances are applied *after* group-wise acceptances, the
``accepted.count(4)`` criteria is applied last even though it's
defined first.


Explicit Ordering
-----------------

If you want to control this order explicitly, you can use nested
``with`` statements to change the default behavior::

    with accepted([Missing('A'), Missing('B')]):
        with accepted.count(4):
            ...

Using nested ``with`` statements, the inner-most block is applied
first and outer blocks are applied in order until the outer-most
block is applied last. In this example, the ``accepted.count(4)``
is applied first because it's declared in the inner-most block.
