docs/api.rst, before:


.. module:: datatest

###################
Developer Interface
###################


************
DataTestCase
************

.. autoclass:: datatest.DataTestCase

    .. autoattribute:: subjectData
    .. autoattribute:: referenceData


    .. _assert-methods:

    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | Method                                                          | Checks that                              |
    +=================================================================+==========================================+
    | :meth:`assertDataColumns(required=None)                         | column names match *required*            |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataColumns>`                      |                                          |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataSet(columns, required=None)                    | one or more *columns* contains           |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataSet>`                          | *required*                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataSum(column, keys, required=None)               | sums of *column* values, grouped by      |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataSum>`                          | *keys*, match *required* dict            |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataCount(column, keys, required=None)             | counts of *column* values, grouped by    |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataCount>`                        | *keys*, match *required* dict            |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataRegex(column, required)                        | *required*.search(val) for each val in   |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataRegex>`                        | *column*                                 |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataNotRegex(column, required)                     | not *required*.search(val) for each val  |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataNotRegex>`                     | in *column*                              |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+

    .. automethod:: assertDataColumns
    .. automethod:: assertDataSet
    .. automethod:: assertDataSum
    .. automethod:: assertDataCount
    .. automethod:: assertDataRegex
    .. automethod:: assertDataNotRegex


    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | Context Manager                                                 | Allows                                   |
    +=================================================================+==========================================+
    | :meth:`allowOnly(differences)                                   | only specified *differences*             |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowOnly>`                              |                                          |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowAny(number)                                         | given *number* of differences of any     |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowAny>`                               | class                                    |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowAny(**kwds_filter)                                  | unlimited number of differences of any   |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowAny>`                               | class that match given                   |
    |                                                                 | :ref:`keyword filters <kwds-filter>`     |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowExtra(number=None)                                  | given *number* of :class:`Extra          |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowExtra>`                             | <datatest.Extra>` differences or         |
    |                                                                 | unlimited number if ``None``             |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowMissing(number=None)                                | given *number* of :class:`Missing        |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowMissing>`                           | <datatest.Missing>` differences or       |
    |                                                                 | unlimited number if ``None``             |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowDeviation(tolerance)                                | :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowDeviation>`                         | of plus or minus given *tolerance*       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowPercentDeviation(tolerance)                         | :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowPercentDeviation>`                  | of plus or minus given *tolerance*       |
    |                                                                 | percentage                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+

    .. automethod:: allowOnly

    .. automethod:: allowAny

    .. automethod:: allowMissing

    .. automethod:: allowExtra

    .. method:: allowDeviation(tolerance, /, msg=None, **kwds_filter)
                allowDeviation(lower, upper, msg=None, **kwds_filter)

        Context manager to allow for deviations from required
        numeric values without triggering a test failure.

        Allowing deviations of plus-or-minus a given *tolerance*::

            with self.allowDeviation(5):  # tolerance of +/- 5
                self.assertDataSum('column2', group_by=['column1'])

        Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds::

            with self.allowDeviation(-2, 3):  # tolerance from -2 to +3
                self.assertDataSum('column2', group_by=['column1'])

        All deviations within the accepted tolerance range are
        suppressed but those that exceed the range will trigger
        a test failure.

        .. note:: The "``tolerance, /,``" part of this method's
                  signature means that *tolerance* is a positional-only
                  parameter---it cannot be specified using keyword
                  syntax.

    .. automethod:: allowPercentDeviation


.. _kwds-filter:

Filter by Keywords (using \*\*kwds_filter)
==========================================

Many datatest methods support optional keyword arguments to quickly filter the
data being tested.  For example, adding ``state='Ohio'`` to a data assertion
would limit the test to those records where the "state" column contains the
value "Ohio"::

    self.assertDataSet('postal_code', state='Ohio')

Multiple keywords can be used to further specify the data being tested.  The
keyword filter ``state='Ohio', city='Columbus'`` limits the test to records
where the "state" column contains the value "Ohio" *and* the "city" column
contains the value "Columbus"::

    self.assertDataSet('postal_code', state='Ohio', city='Columbus')

Keyword arguments can also contain multiple values.  Using ``state=['Indiana',
'Ohio']`` limits the test to records where the "state" column contains the
value "Indiana" *or* the value "Ohio"::

    self.assertDataSet('postal_code', state=['Indiana', 'Ohio'])


.. _data-sources:

************
Data Sources
************

Data source objects are used to access data in various formats.

+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Class                                       | Loads                                   |
+=============================================+=========================================+
| :class:`CsvSource(file)                     | CSV from path or file-like object       |
| <datatest.CsvSource>`                       | *file*                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| :class:`SqliteSource(connection, table)     | *table* from SQLite *connection*        |
| <datatest.SqliteSource>`                    |                                         |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| :class:`ExcelSource(path, worksheet=None)   | Excel *worksheet* from XLSX or XLS      |
| <datatest.ExcelSource>`                     | *path*, defaults to the first worksheet |
|                                             | if ``None`` (requires ``xlrd`` package) |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| :class:`PandasSource(df)                    | pandas DataFrame *df* (requires         |
| <datatest.PandasSource>`                    | ``pandas``)                             |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| :class:`MultiSource(*sources)               | multiple data *sources* which can be    |
| <datatest.MultiSource>`                     | treated as single data source           |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+


CsvSource
=========
.. autoclass:: datatest.CsvSource
   :members: create_index


SqliteSource
============
.. autoclass:: datatest.SqliteSource
   :members: create_index, from_records


.. _extra-sources:

If you have the appropriate, optional dependencies installed, datatest
provides additional data source options:

ExcelSource
===========
.. autoclass:: datatest.ExcelSource
   :members: create_index


PandasSource
============
.. autoclass:: datatest.PandasSource


-----------


MultiSource
===========
.. autoclass:: datatest.MultiSource

    Data is aligned by column name and missing values are filled with empty
    strings:

        .. image:: _static/multisource.*


AdapterSource
=============
.. autoclass:: datatest.AdapterSource



Common Methods
==========================

All data sources implement a set of common methods which are inhereted
from a common BaseSource.  Typically, these methods are used indirectly
via DataTestCase but it is also possible to call them directly:

.. autoclass:: datatest.BaseSource
    :members: columns, __iter__, filter_rows, distinct, sum, count, mapreduce


******************
Comparison Objects
******************

Querying a data source with various methods will return a CompareSet or
a CompareDict.


CompareSet
==========
.. autoclass:: datatest.CompareSet
    :members: make_rows, compare


CompareDict
===========
.. autoclass:: datatest.CompareDict
    :members: make_rows, compare

    .. py:attribute:: key_names

        Column names for result keys.


*********************
Error and Differences
*********************

.. autoclass:: datatest.DataAssertionError
   :members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.Extra
   :members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.Missing
   :members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.Invalid
   :members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.Deviation
   :members:


*******************
Test Runner Program
*******************

.. py:decorator:: datatest.mandatory

    A decorator to mark whole test cases or individual methods as
    mandatory.  If a mandatory test fails, DataTestRunner will stop
    immediately (this is similar to the ``--failfast`` command line
    argument behavior)::

        @datatest.mandatory
        class TestFileFormat(datatest.DataTestCase):
            def test_columns(self):
                ...

.. py:decorator:: datatest.skip(reason)

    A decorator to unconditionally skip a test::

        @datatest.skip('Not finished collecting raw data.')
        class TestSumTotals(datatest.DataTestCase):
            def test_totals(self):
                ...

.. py:decorator:: datatest.skipIf(condition, reason)

    A decorator to skip a test if the condition is true.

.. py:decorator:: datatest.skipUnless(condition, reason)

    A decorator to skip a test unless the condition is true.

.. autoclass:: datatest.DataTestRunner
    :members:
    :inherited-members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.DataTestProgram(module='__main__', defaultTest=None, argv=None, testRunner=datatest.DataTestRunner, testLoader=unittest.TestLoader, exit=True, verbosity=1, failfast=None, catchbreak=None, buffer=None, warnings=None)
    :members:
    :inherited-members:

|

.. autoclass:: datatest.main
   :members:
   :inherited-members:

Commit message:

Add initial implementation for "assert unique" method, add relevant tests, and add entry to API docs.

docs/api.rst, after:


.. module:: datatest

###################
Developer Interface
###################


************
DataTestCase
************

.. autoclass:: datatest.DataTestCase

    .. autoattribute:: subjectData
    .. autoattribute:: referenceData


    .. _assert-methods:

    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | Method                                                          | Checks that                              |
    +=================================================================+==========================================+
    | :meth:`assertDataColumns(required=None)                         | column names match *required*            |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataColumns>`                      |                                          |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataSet(columns, required=None)                    | one or more *columns* contains           |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataSet>`                          | *required*                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataSum(column, keys, required=None)               | sums of *column* values, grouped by      |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataSum>`                          | *keys*, match *required* dict            |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataCount(column, keys, required=None)             | counts of *column* values, grouped by    |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataCount>`                        | *keys*, match *required* dict            |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataRegex(column, required)                        | *required*.search(val) for each val in   |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataRegex>`                        | *column*                                 |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataNotRegex(column, required)                     | not *required*.search(val) for each val  |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataNotRegex>`                     | in *column*                              |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`assertDataUnique(columns)                                | values in *columns* are unique and       |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.assertDataUnique>`                       | contain no duplicates                    |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+

    .. automethod:: assertDataColumns
    .. automethod:: assertDataSet
    .. automethod:: assertDataSum
    .. automethod:: assertDataCount
    .. automethod:: assertDataRegex
    .. automethod:: assertDataNotRegex
    .. automethod:: assertDataUnique


    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | Context Manager                                                 | Allows                                   |
    +=================================================================+==========================================+
    | :meth:`allowOnly(differences)                                   | only specified *differences*             |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowOnly>`                              |                                          |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowAny(number)                                         | given *number* of differences of any     |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowAny>`                               | class                                    |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowAny(**kwds_filter)                                  | unlimited number of differences of any   |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowAny>`                               | class that match given                   |
    |                                                                 | :ref:`keyword filters <kwds-filter>`     |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowExtra(number=None)                                  | given *number* of :class:`Extra          |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowExtra>`                             | <datatest.Extra>` differences or         |
    |                                                                 | unlimited number if ``None``             |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowMissing(number=None)                                | given *number* of :class:`Missing        |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowMissing>`                           | <datatest.Missing>` differences or       |
    |                                                                 | unlimited number if ``None``             |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowDeviation(tolerance)                                | :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowDeviation>`                         | of plus or minus given *tolerance*       |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | :meth:`allowPercentDeviation(tolerance)                         | :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` |
    | <datatest.DataTestCase.allowPercentDeviation>`                  | of plus or minus given *tolerance*       |
    |                                                                 | percentage                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------+

    .. automethod:: allowOnly

    .. automethod:: allowAny

    .. automethod:: allowMissing

    .. automethod:: allowExtra

    .. method:: allowDeviation(tolerance, /, msg=None, **kwds_filter)
                allowDeviation(lower, upper, msg=None, **kwds_filter)

        Context manager to allow for deviations from required
        numeric values without triggering a test failure.

        Allowing deviations of plus-or-minus a given *tolerance*::

            with self.allowDeviation(5):  # tolerance of +/- 5
                self.assertDataSum('column2', group_by=['column1'])

        Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds::

            with self.allowDeviation(-2, 3):  # tolerance from -2 to +3
                self.assertDataSum('column2', group_by=['column1'])

        All deviations within the accepted tolerance range are
        suppressed but those that exceed the range will trigger
        a test failure.

        .. note:: The "``tolerance, /,``" part of this method's
                  signature means that *tolerance* is a positional-only
                  parameter---it cannot be specified using keyword
                  syntax.

    .. automethod:: allowPercentDeviation


.. _kwds-filter:

Filter by Keywords (using \*\*kwds_filter)
==========================================

Many datatest methods support optional keyword arguments to quickly filter the
data being tested.  For example, adding ``state='Ohio'`` to a data assertion
would limit the test to those records where the "state" column contains the
value "Ohio"::

    self.assertDataSet('postal_code', state='Ohio')

Multiple keywords can be used to further specify the data being tested.  The
keyword filter ``state='Ohio', city='Columbus'`` limits the test to records
where the "state" column contains the value "Ohio" *and* the "city" column
contains the value "Columbus"::

    self.assertDataSet('postal_code', state='Ohio', city='Columbus')

Keyword arguments can also contain multiple values.  Using ``state=['Indiana',
'Ohio']`` limits the test to records where the "state" column contains the
value "Indiana" *or* the value "Ohio"::

    self.assertDataSet('postal_code', state=['Indiana', 'Ohio'])


.. _data-sources:

************
Data Sources
************

Data source objects are used to access data in various formats.

+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Class                                       | Loads                                   |
+=============================================+=========================================+
| :class:`CsvSource(file)                     | CSV from path or file-like object       |
| <datatest.CsvSource>`                       | *file*                                  |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| :class:`SqliteSource(connection, table)     | *table* from SQLite *connection*        |
| <datatest.SqliteSource>`                    |                                         |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| :class:`ExcelSource(path, worksheet=None)   | Excel *worksheet* from XLSX or XLS      |
| <datatest.ExcelSource>`                     | *path*, defaults to the first worksheet |
|                                             | if ``None`` (requires ``xlrd`` package) |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| :class:`PandasSource(df)                    | pandas DataFrame *df* (requires         |
| <datatest.PandasSource>`                    | ``pandas``)                             |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| :class:`MultiSource(*sources)               | multiple data *sources* which can be    |
| <datatest.MultiSource>`                     | treated as single data source           |
+---------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+


CsvSource
=========
.. autoclass:: datatest.CsvSource
   :members: create_index


SqliteSource
============
.. autoclass:: datatest.SqliteSource
   :members: create_index, from_records


.. _extra-sources:

If you have the appropriate, optional dependencies installed, datatest
provides additional data source options:

ExcelSource
===========
.. autoclass:: datatest.ExcelSource
   :members: create_index


PandasSource
============
.. autoclass:: datatest.PandasSource


-----------


MultiSource
===========
.. autoclass:: datatest.MultiSource

    Data is aligned by column name and missing values are filled with empty
    strings:

        .. image:: _static/multisource.*


AdapterSource
=============
.. autoclass:: datatest.AdapterSource



Common Methods
==========================

All data sources implement a set of common methods which are inhereted
from a common BaseSource.  Typically, these methods are used indirectly
via DataTestCase but it is also possible to call them directly:

.. autoclass:: datatest.BaseSource
    :members: columns, __iter__, filter_rows, distinct, sum, count, mapreduce


******************
Comparison Objects
******************

Querying a data source with various methods will return a CompareSet or
a CompareDict.


CompareSet
==========
.. autoclass:: datatest.CompareSet
    :members: make_rows, compare


CompareDict
===========
.. autoclass:: datatest.CompareDict
    :members: make_rows, compare

    .. py:attribute:: key_names

        Column names for result keys.


*********************
Error and Differences
*********************

.. autoclass:: datatest.DataAssertionError
   :members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.Extra
   :members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.Missing
   :members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.Invalid
   :members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.Deviation
   :members:


*******************
Test Runner Program
*******************

.. py:decorator:: datatest.mandatory

    A decorator to mark whole test cases or individual methods as
    mandatory.  If a mandatory test fails, DataTestRunner will stop
    immediately (this is similar to the ``--failfast`` command line
    argument behavior)::

        @datatest.mandatory
        class TestFileFormat(datatest.DataTestCase):
            def test_columns(self):
                ...

.. py:decorator:: datatest.skip(reason)

    A decorator to unconditionally skip a test::

        @datatest.skip('Not finished collecting raw data.')
        class TestSumTotals(datatest.DataTestCase):
            def test_totals(self):
                ...

.. py:decorator:: datatest.skipIf(condition, reason)

    A decorator to skip a test if the condition is true.

.. py:decorator:: datatest.skipUnless(condition, reason)

    A decorator to skip a test unless the condition is true.

.. autoclass:: datatest.DataTestRunner
    :members:
    :inherited-members:

.. autoclass:: datatest.DataTestProgram(module='__main__', defaultTest=None, argv=None, testRunner=datatest.DataTestRunner, testLoader=unittest.TestLoader, exit=True, verbosity=1, failfast=None, catchbreak=None, buffer=None, warnings=None)
    :members:
    :inherited-members:

|

.. autoclass:: datatest.main
   :members:
   :inherited-members:
