docs/data_sources.rst, before:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: working with data sources
    :keywords: datatest, DataSource, DataQuery, DataResult


################
Data Sources API
################

It's important to have a convinient and expressive way to load
and query data. Datatest provides a :class:`DataSource` class
that should cover many common use cases. But users already familiar
with other tools (Pandas, SQLAlchemy, etc.) should feel free to
use them instead. The best data source to use is the one you can
wield most effectively.

..  To help use third-party data sources, datatest includes a number of
    helper functions to quickly load data into a variety of ORMs and DALs.


***********************
Load and Query Examples
***********************

The following code samples demonstrate ways to load and query
data using a :class:`DataSource`. In these examples, we will
use the data below:

    ===  ===  =====
    one  two  three
    ===  ===  =====
     a    x    100
     a    x    100
     b    x    100
     b    y    100
     c    y    100
     c    y    100
    ===  ===  =====


Loading Data
============

Load our data from a CSV file (:download:`example.csv
<_static/example.csv>`)::

    import datatest
    source = datatest.DataSource.from_csv('example.csv')

Load our data from a list of sequences::

    import datatest
    data = [
        ['a', 'x', '100'],
        ['a', 'x', '100'],
        ['b', 'x', '100'],
        ['b', 'y', '100'],
        ['c', 'y', '100'],
        ['c', 'y', '100'],
    ]
    columns = ['one', 'two', 'three']
    source = datatest.DataSource(data, columns)

Load our data from a list of dictionaries::

    import datatest
    data = [
        {'one': 'a', 'two': 'x', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'a', 'two': 'x', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'b', 'two': 'x', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'b', 'two': 'y', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'c', 'two': 'y', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'c', 'two': 'y', 'three': '100'},
    ]
    source = datatest.DataSource(data)


Column Names
============

You can get a list of column names from an existing source with
the :meth:`columns() <DataSource.columns>` method::

    >>> source.columns()
    ['one', 'two', 'three']


Selecting Data
==============

Calling our source like a function returns a :class:`DataQuery`
for the specified column or columns. The :meth:`execute()
<DataQuery.execute>` method runs the query and returns the
results.

Select values from column **one**::

    >>> source('one').execute()
    ['a', 'a', 'b', 'b', 'c', 'c']

Select values from columns **one** and **two** using a
:py:class:`list`::

    >>> source(['one', 'two']).execute()  # Returns a result of lists.
    [['a', 'x'],
     ['a', 'x'],
     ['b', 'x'],
     ['b', 'y'],
     ['c', 'y'],
     ['c', 'y']]

The container type used in the selection determines the types
returned in the result. Above, we selected two columns using a
list and got a result of lists. By changing the selection type,
we can change the types we get from the result.

Select values from columns **one** and **two** using a
:py:class:`tuple`::

    >>> source(('one', 'two')).execute()  # Returns a result of tuples.
    [('a', 'x'),
     ('a', 'x'),
     ('b', 'x'),
     ('b', 'y'),
     ('c', 'y'),
     ('c', 'y')]

Group and select column values using a :py:class:`dict`::

    >>> source({'one': 'three'}).execute()  # Grouped by key.
    {'a': ['100', '100'],
     'b': ['100', '100'],
     'c': ['100', '100']}

Group and select column values using a :py:class:`dict` with a
:py:class:`tuple` of keys::

    >>> source({('one', 'two'): 'three'}).execute()
    {('a', 'x'): ['100', '100'],
     ('b', 'x'): ['100'],
     ('b', 'y'): ['100'],
     ('c', 'y'): ['100', '100']}


Narrowing a Selection
=====================

Selections can be narrowed to rows that satisfy given keyword
arguments.

Narrow a selection to rows where column **two** equals "x"::

    >>> source(('one', 'two'), two='x').execute()
    [('a', 'x'),
     ('a', 'x'),
     ('b', 'x')]

The keyword column does not have to be in the selected result::

    >>> source('one', two='x').execute()
    ['a',
     'a',
     'b']

Narrow a selection to rows where column **one** equals "a" *or* "b"::

    >>> source(('one', 'two'), one=['a', 'b']).execute()
    [('a', 'x'),
     ('a', 'x'),
     ('b', 'x'),
     ('b', 'y')]

Narrow a selection to rows where column **one** equals "b" *and*
column **two** equals "y"::

    >>> source(('one', 'two'), one='b', two='y').execute()
    [('b', 'y')]  # Only 1 row matches these keyword conditions.


Query Operations
================

:meth:`Sum <DataQuery.sum>` the values from column **three**::

    >>> source('three').sum().execute()
    600

Group by column **one** and sum the values from column **three** (for
each group)::

    >>> source({'one': 'three'}).sum().execute()
    {'a': 200,
     'b': 200,
     'c': 200}

Group by columns **one** and **two** and sum the values from column
**three**::

    >>> source({('one', 'two'): 'three'}).sum().execute()
    {('a', 'x'): 200,
     ('b', 'x'): 100,
     ('b', 'y'): 100,
     ('c', 'y'): 200}

Select :meth:`distinct <DataQuery.distinct>` values::

    >>> source('one').distinct().execute()
    ['a', 'b', 'c']

Select a :meth:`set <DataQuery.set>` of values::

    >>> source('one').set().execute()
    {'a', 'b', 'c'}

:meth:`Map <DataQuery.map>` values with a function::

    >>> def uppercase(x):
    ...     return str(x).upper()
    ...
    >>> source('one').map(uppercase).execute()
    ['A', 'A', 'B', 'B', 'C', 'C']

:meth:`Reduce <DataQuery.reduce>` values with a function::

    >>> def concatenate(x, y):
    ...     return '{0}{1}'.format(x, y)
    ...
    >>> source('one').reduce(concatenate).execute()
    'aabbcc'

:meth:`Filter <DataQuery.filter>` values with a function::

    >>> def not_c(x):
    ...     return x != 'c'
    ...
    >>> source('one').filter(not_c).execute()
    ['a', 'a', 'b', 'b']

Multiple methods can be chained together:

    >>> def uppercase(x):
    ...     return str(x).upper()
    ...
    >>> def concatenate(x, y):
    ...     return '{0}{1}'.format(x, y)
    ...
    >>> source('one').map(uppercase).reduce(concatenate).execute()
    'AABBCC'


**********
DataSource
**********

.. autoclass:: DataSource

    .. automethod:: from_csv

    .. automethod:: from_excel

    .. automethod:: columns

    .. automethod:: __call__


*********
DataQuery
*********

.. autoclass:: DataQuery

    .. automethod:: sum

    .. automethod:: count

    .. automethod:: avg

    .. automethod:: min

    .. automethod:: max

    .. automethod:: distinct

    .. automethod:: set

    .. automethod:: map

    .. automethod:: filter

    .. automethod:: reduce

    .. automethod:: execute

    .. automethod:: __call__


**********
DataResult
**********

.. autoclass:: DataResult

    .. attribute:: evaluation_type

        The type of instance returned by the
        :meth:`evaluate <DataResult.evaluate>` method.

    .. automethod:: evaluate

    .. attribute:: __wrapped__

        The underlying iterator---useful when introspecting
        or rewrapping.


*****************
working_directory
*****************

.. autoclass:: working_directory

Commit message:

Add detail to "selecting groups" documentation and reword docstring for working_directory().

docs/data_sources.rst, after:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: working with data sources
    :keywords: datatest, DataSource, DataQuery, DataResult


################
Data Sources API
################

It's important to have a convinient and expressive way to load
and query data. Datatest provides a :class:`DataSource` class
that should cover many common use cases. But users already familiar
with other tools (Pandas, SQLAlchemy, etc.) should feel free to
use them instead. The best data source to use is the one you can
wield most effectively.

..  To help use third-party data sources, datatest includes a number of
    helper functions to quickly load data into a variety of ORMs and DALs.


***********************
Load and Query Examples
***********************

The following code samples demonstrate ways to load and query
data using a :class:`DataSource`. In these examples, we will
use the data below:

    ===  ===  =====
    one  two  three
    ===  ===  =====
     a    x    100
     a    x    100
     b    x    100
     b    y    100
     c    y    100
     c    y    100
    ===  ===  =====


Loading Data
============

Load our data from a CSV file (:download:`example.csv
<_static/example.csv>`)::

    import datatest
    source = datatest.DataSource.from_csv('example.csv')

Load our data from a list of sequences::

    import datatest
    data = [
        ['a', 'x', '100'],
        ['a', 'x', '100'],
        ['b', 'x', '100'],
        ['b', 'y', '100'],
        ['c', 'y', '100'],
        ['c', 'y', '100'],
    ]
    columns = ['one', 'two', 'three']
    source = datatest.DataSource(data, columns)

Load our data from a list of dictionaries::

    import datatest
    data = [
        {'one': 'a', 'two': 'x', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'a', 'two': 'x', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'b', 'two': 'x', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'b', 'two': 'y', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'c', 'two': 'y', 'three': '100'},
        {'one': 'c', 'two': 'y', 'three': '100'},
    ]
    source = datatest.DataSource(data)


Column Names
============

You can get a list of column names from an existing source with
the :meth:`columns() <DataSource.columns>` method::

    >>> source.columns()
    ['one', 'two', 'three']


Selecting Data
==============

Calling our source like a function returns a :class:`DataQuery`
for the specified column or columns. The :meth:`execute()
<DataQuery.execute>` method runs the query and returns the
results.

Select values from column **one**::

    >>> source('one').execute()
    ['a', 'a', 'b', 'b', 'c', 'c']

Select values from columns **one** and **two** using a
:py:class:`list`::

    >>> source(['one', 'two']).execute()  # Returns a result of lists.
    [['a', 'x'],
     ['a', 'x'],
     ['b', 'x'],
     ['b', 'y'],
     ['c', 'y'],
     ['c', 'y']]

Select values from columns **one** and **two** using a
:py:class:`tuple`::

    >>> source(('one', 'two')).execute()  # Returns a result of tuples.
    [('a', 'x'),
     ('a', 'x'),
     ('b', 'x'),
     ('b', 'y'),
     ('c', 'y'),
     ('c', 'y')]

The previous two examples demonstrate how the type used to select the
data determines the types returned in the result. Selecting two columns
as a list gives us a result of lists. Selecting the same two columns as
a tuple gives us a result of tuples.


Selecting Groups of Data
========================

Group and select column values using a :py:class:`dict`::

    >>> source({'one': 'three'}).execute()  # Grouped by key.
    {'a': ['100', '100'],
     'b': ['100', '100'],
     'c': ['100', '100']}

Group and select column values using a :py:class:`dict` with a
:py:class:`tuple` of keys::

    >>> source({('one', 'two'): 'three'}).execute()
    {('a', 'x'): ['100', '100'],
     ('b', 'x'): ['100'],
     ('b', 'y'): ['100'],
     ('c', 'y'): ['100', '100']}

When selecting groups of data, you must provide a dictionary with
a single key-value pair. As before, the selection types determine the
result types but keep in mind that dictionary keys must be `immutable
<http://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-immutable>`_
(:py:class:`str`, :py:class:`tuple`, :py:class:`frozenset`, etc.).


Narrowing a Selection
=====================

Selections can be narrowed to rows that satisfy given keyword
arguments.

Narrow a selection to rows where column **two** equals "x"::

    >>> source(('one', 'two'), two='x').execute()
    [('a', 'x'),
     ('a', 'x'),
     ('b', 'x')]

The keyword column does not have to be in the selected result::

    >>> source('one', two='x').execute()
    ['a',
     'a',
     'b']

Narrow a selection to rows where column **one** equals "a" *or* "b"::

    >>> source(('one', 'two'), one=['a', 'b']).execute()
    [('a', 'x'),
     ('a', 'x'),
     ('b', 'x'),
     ('b', 'y')]

Narrow a selection to rows where column **one** equals "b" *and*
column **two** equals "y"::

    >>> source(('one', 'two'), one='b', two='y').execute()
    [('b', 'y')]  # Only 1 row matches these keyword conditions.


Query Operations
================

:meth:`Sum <DataQuery.sum>` the values from column **three**::

    >>> source('three').sum().execute()
    600

Group by column **one** and sum the values from column **three** (for
each group)::

    >>> source({'one': 'three'}).sum().execute()
    {'a': 200,
     'b': 200,
     'c': 200}

Group by columns **one** and **two** and sum the values from column
**three**::

    >>> source({('one', 'two'): 'three'}).sum().execute()
    {('a', 'x'): 200,
     ('b', 'x'): 100,
     ('b', 'y'): 100,
     ('c', 'y'): 200}

Select :meth:`distinct <DataQuery.distinct>` values::

    >>> source('one').distinct().execute()
    ['a', 'b', 'c']

Select a :meth:`set <DataQuery.set>` of values::

    >>> source('one').set().execute()
    {'a', 'b', 'c'}

:meth:`Map <DataQuery.map>` values with a function::

    >>> def uppercase(x):
    ...     return str(x).upper()
    ...
    >>> source('one').map(uppercase).execute()
    ['A', 'A', 'B', 'B', 'C', 'C']

:meth:`Reduce <DataQuery.reduce>` values with a function::

    >>> def concatenate(x, y):
    ...     return '{0}{1}'.format(x, y)
    ...
    >>> source('one').reduce(concatenate).execute()
    'aabbcc'

:meth:`Filter <DataQuery.filter>` values with a function::

    >>> def not_c(x):
    ...     return x != 'c'
    ...
    >>> source('one').filter(not_c).execute()
    ['a', 'a', 'b', 'b']

Multiple methods can be chained together:

    >>> def uppercase(x):
    ...     return str(x).upper()
    ...
    >>> def concatenate(x, y):
    ...     return '{0}{1}'.format(x, y)
    ...
    >>> source('one').map(uppercase).reduce(concatenate).execute()
    'AABBCC'


**********
DataSource
**********

.. autoclass:: DataSource

    .. automethod:: from_csv

    .. automethod:: from_excel

    .. automethod:: columns

    .. automethod:: __call__


*********
DataQuery
*********

.. autoclass:: DataQuery

    .. automethod:: sum

    .. automethod:: count

    .. automethod:: avg

    .. automethod:: min

    .. automethod:: max

    .. automethod:: distinct

    .. automethod:: set

    .. automethod:: map

    .. automethod:: filter

    .. automethod:: reduce

    .. automethod:: execute

    .. automethod:: __call__


**********
DataResult
**********

.. autoclass:: DataResult

    .. attribute:: evaluation_type

        The type of instance returned by the
        :meth:`evaluate <DataResult.evaluate>` method.

    .. automethod:: evaluate

    .. attribute:: __wrapped__

        The underlying iterator---useful when introspecting
        or rewrapping.


*****************
working_directory
*****************

.. autoclass:: working_directory
