docs/datasources.rst, before:


************
Data Sources
************

Data source objects are used to access data in various formats.

+------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Class                        | Loads                                 |
+==============================+=======================================+
| :class:`CsvSource(f)         | CSV file *f* (path or file-like       |
| <datatest.CsvSource>`        | object)                               |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| :class:`SqliteSource(c, t)   | table *t* from SQLite connection *c*  |
| <datatest.SqliteSource>`     |                                       |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| :class:`MultiSource(*s)      | wrapper for multiple sources *s* that |
| <datatest.MultiSource>`      | acts as a single data source          |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

|

.. autoclass:: datatest.CsvSource
   :members: create_index

.. autoclass:: datatest.SqliteSource
   :members: create_index, from_records

.. autoclass:: datatest.MultiSource


--------

If you have the appropriate, optional dependencies installed, datatest
provides a variety of other data sources:

+-------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Class                                     | Loads                                       |
+===========================================+=============================================+
| :class:`ExcelSource(p, worksheet=None)    | Excel *worksheet* from XLSX or XLS path *p* |
| <datatest.ExcelSource>`                   | (defaults to the first worksheet if None),  |
|                                           | requires `xlrd                              |
|                                           | <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/xlrd>`_        |
+-------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| :class:`PandasSource(df)                  | DataFrame *df*, requires `pandas            |
| <datatest.PandasSource>`                  | <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pandas>`_      |
+-------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+

|

.. autoclass:: datatest.ExcelSource

.. autoclass:: datatest.PandasSource
   :members: from_records


Common Methods
==============
Data sources implement a common set of methods which are used by
DataTestCase to access data and report meaningful failure messages.
Typically, these methods are used indirectly via DataTestCase but it is
also possible to call them directly:


.. py:method:: __iter__()

    Return an iterable of dictionary rows (like ``csv.DictReader``).


.. py:method:: columns()

    Return a list or tuple of column names.


.. py:method:: distinct(column, **filter_by)

    Return ResultSet containing distinct *column* values.


.. py:method:: sum(column, group_by=None, **filter_by)

    Returns sum of *column* grouped by *group_by* as ResultMapping.


.. py:method:: count(group_by=None, **filter_by)

    Returns count of rows grouped by *group_by* as ResultMapping.


.. py:method:: aggregate(function, column, group_by=None, **filter_by)

    Aggregates values in the given *column*.  If *group_by* is omitted, the
    result is returned as-is, otherwise returns a ResultMapping object.  The
    *function* should take an iterable and return a single summary value.


*******************
Custom Data Sources
*******************

If you need to test data in a format that's not currently supported,
you can make your own custom data source.  You do this by subclassing
:class:`BaseSource` and implementing the basic, common methods.

As a starting point, you can use one of the following templates:

+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Template File                 | Used for...                              |
+===============================+==========================================+
| :download:`native_template.py | Formats with fast, built-in access to    |
| <_static/template.py>`        | stored data (e.g., SQL, pandas, etc.)    |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| :download:`loader_template.py | Storage formats with no fast access to   |
| <_static/template.py>`        | data (internally reuses SqliteSource     |
|                               | for faster performance).                 |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------+

|

.. autoclass:: datatest.BaseSource
    :members: __init__, __repr__, __iter__, columns, distinct, sum, count, aggregate


*******************
Data Source Results
*******************

Querying a data source with various methods will return a ResultSet or a
ResultMapping.

.. autoclass:: datatest.ResultSet
    :members: make_rows, compare

.. autoclass:: datatest.ResultMapping
    :members: group_by, make_rows, compare

Commit message:

Add image to help explain MultiSource() behavior, make small updates to existing documentation.

docs/datasources.rst, after:


************
Data Sources
************

Data source objects are used to access data in various formats.  For
additional sources, see :ref:`optional data sources <extra-sources>`
(below).

+------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| Class                        | Loads                                 |
+==============================+=======================================+
| :class:`CsvSource(f)         | CSV file *f* (path or file-like       |
| <datatest.CsvSource>`        | object)                               |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| :class:`SqliteSource(c, t)   | table *t* from SQLite connection *c*  |
| <datatest.SqliteSource>`     |                                       |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| :class:`MultiSource(*s)      | wrapper for multiple sources *s* that |
| <datatest.MultiSource>`      | acts as a single data source          |
+------------------------------+---------------------------------------+

|

.. autoclass:: datatest.CsvSource
   :members: create_index

.. autoclass:: datatest.SqliteSource
   :members: create_index, from_records

.. autoclass:: datatest.MultiSource

    Data is aligned by column name and missing values are filled with empty
    strings:

        .. image:: _static/multisource.*

--------

.. _extra-sources:

If you have the appropriate, optional dependencies installed, datatest
provides a variety of other data sources:

+-------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Class                                     | Loads                                       |
+===========================================+=============================================+
| :class:`ExcelSource(p, worksheet=None)    | Excel *worksheet* from XLSX or XLS path *p* |
| <datatest.ExcelSource>`                   | (defaults to the first worksheet if None),  |
|                                           | requires `xlrd                              |
|                                           | <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/xlrd>`_        |
+-------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| :class:`PandasSource(df)                  | DataFrame *df*, requires `pandas            |
| <datatest.PandasSource>`                  | <http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pandas>`_      |
+-------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------+

|

.. autoclass:: datatest.ExcelSource

.. autoclass:: datatest.PandasSource
   :members: from_records


Common Methods
==============
Data sources implement a common set of methods which are used by
DataTestCase to access data and report meaningful failure messages.
Typically, these methods are used indirectly via DataTestCase but it is
also possible to call them directly:


.. py:method:: __iter__()

    Return an iterable of dictionary rows (like ``csv.DictReader``).


.. py:method:: columns()

    Return a list or tuple of column names.


.. py:method:: distinct(column, **filter_by)

    Return ResultSet containing distinct *column* values.


.. py:method:: sum(column, group_by=None, **filter_by)

    Returns sum of *column* grouped by *group_by* as ResultMapping.


.. py:method:: count(group_by=None, **filter_by)

    Returns count of rows grouped by *group_by* as ResultMapping.


.. py:method:: aggregate(function, column, group_by=None, **filter_by)

    Aggregates values in the given *column*.  If *group_by* is omitted, the
    result is returned as-is, otherwise returns a ResultMapping object.  The
    *function* should take an iterable and return a single summary value.


*******************
Custom Data Sources
*******************

If you need to test data in a format that's not currently supported,
you can make your own custom data source.  You do this by subclassing
:class:`BaseSource` and implementing the basic, common methods.

As a starting point, you can use one of the following templates:

+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Template File                 | Used for...                              |
+===============================+==========================================+
| :download:`native_template.py | Formats with fast, built-in access to    |
| <_static/template.py>`        | stored data (e.g., SQL, pandas, etc.)    |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| :download:`loader_template.py | Storage formats with no fast access to   |
| <_static/template.py>`        | data (internally reuses SqliteSource     |
|                               | for faster performance).                 |
+-------------------------------+------------------------------------------+

|

.. autoclass:: datatest.BaseSource
    :members: __init__, __repr__, __iter__, columns, distinct, sum, count, aggregate


*******************
Data Source Results
*******************

Querying a data source with various methods will return a ResultSet or a
ResultMapping.

.. autoclass:: datatest.ResultSet
    :members: make_rows, compare

.. autoclass:: datatest.ResultMapping
    :members: make_rows, compare

    .. py:attribute:: key_names

        Column names for result keys.
