docs/reference/core-api.rst, before:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: datatest API
    :keywords: datatest, API, reference


######################
Datatest API Reference
######################


**********
Validation
**********

.. autofunction:: validate

.. autofunction:: valid


.. _predicates:

**********
Predicates
**********

Datatest uses "predicate objects" to check that values satisfy a
certain criteria. The specific behavior of a predicate depends
on its type:

    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | Predicate type       | Checks that                              |
    +======================+==========================================+
    | set                  | value is a member of the set             |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | function             | calling ``function(value)`` returns True |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | re.compile(pattern)  | value matches the regular expression     |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | str or non-container | value equals predicate                   |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | tuple of             | tuple of values satisfies corresponding  |
    | predicates           | tuple of predicates                      |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | "``...``" (an        | (used as a wildcard, matches any value)  |
    | ellipsis)            |                                          |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+

Predicates are used as arguments when asserting validity and
allowing differences. For some examples, see the following
table:

    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | Example Predicate         | Example Value  | Matches |
    +===========================+================+=========+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``'A'``        | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     {'A', 'B'}            | ``'C'``        | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``4``          | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     def iseven(x):        | ``9``          | No      |
    |         return x % 2 == 0 |                |         |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``'bake'``     | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     re.compile('[bc]ake') | ``'cake'``     | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |                           | ``'fake'``     | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``'foo'``      | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     'foo'                 | ``'bar'``      | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``('A', 'X')`` | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     ('A', ...)            | ``('A', 'Y')`` | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    | Uses ellipsis wildcard.   | ``('B', 'X')`` | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+


******
Errors
******

.. autoexception:: ValidationError

    .. autoattribute:: message

    .. autoattribute:: differences


***********
Differences
***********

.. autoclass:: BaseDifference

    .. autoattribute:: args


.. autoclass:: Missing


.. autoclass:: Extra


.. autoclass:: Invalid

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Invalid.invalid
       :annotation:

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Invalid.expected
       :annotation:


.. autoclass:: Deviation

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Deviation.deviation
       :annotation:

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Deviation.expected
       :annotation:


**********
Allowances
**********

.. autoclass:: allowed_missing


.. autoclass:: allowed_extra


.. autoclass:: allowed_invalid


.. autoclass:: allowed_keys


.. autoclass:: allowed_args


.. class:: allowed_deviation(tolerance, /, msg=None)
           allowed_deviation(lower, upper, msg=None)

    Allows numeric :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>`
    within a given *tolerance* without triggering a test
    failure::

        with datatest.allowed_deviation(5):  # tolerance of +/- 5
            datatest.validate(..., ...)

    Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds::

        with datatest.allowed_deviation(-2, 3):  # tolerance from -2 to +3
            datatest.validate(..., ...)

    Deviations within the given range are suppressed while those
    outside the range will trigger a test failure.

    Empty values (None, empty string, etc.) are treated as zeros
    when performing comparisons.


.. class:: allowed_percent_deviation(tolerance, /, msg=None)
           allowed_percent_deviation(lower, upper, msg=None)

    Allows :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` with
    percentages of error within a given *tolerance* without
    triggering a test failure::

        with datatest.allowed_percent_deviation(0.03):  # tolerance of +/- 3%
            datatest.validate(..., ...)

    Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds::

        with datatest.allowed_percent_deviation(-0.02, 0.01):  # tolerance from -2% to +1%
            datatest.validate(..., ...)

    Deviations within the given range are suppressed while those
    outside the range will trigger a test failure.

    Empty values (None, empty string, etc.) are treated as zeros
    when performing comparisons.


.. autoclass:: allowed_specific


.. autoclass:: allowed_limit


Composability
=============

Allowances can be combined to create new allowances with modified
behavior.

The ``&`` operator can be used to create an *intersection* of
allowance criteria. In the following example, :class:`allowed_missing`
and :class:`allowed_limit` are combined into a single allowance that
accepts up to five :class:`Missing` differences::

    with allowed_missing() & allowed_limit(5):
        validate(..., ...)

The ``|`` operator can be used to create *union* of allowance
criteria. In the following example, :class:`allowed_deviation`
and :class:`allowed_percent` are combined into a single allowance
that accepts :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` of ±10
as well as :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` of ±5%::

    with allowed_deviation(10) | allowed_percent(0.05):
        validate(..., ...)

And composed allowances, thsemselves, can be composed to define
increasingly specific allowance criteria::

    five_missing = allowed_missing() & allowed_limit(5)

    minor_deviations = allowed_deviation(10) | allowed_percent(0.05)

    with five_missing | minor_deviations:
        validate(..., ...)


Order of Operations
-------------------

Allowance composition uses the following order of
operations---shown from highest precedence to lowest
precedence. Operations with the same precedence level
(appearing in the same cell) are evaluated from left
to right.

+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Order | Operation                            | Description                |
+=======+======================================+============================+
|   1   | | ``()``                             | Parentheses                |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   2   | | ``&``                              | Bitwise AND (intersection) |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   3   | | ``|``                              | Bitwise OR (union)         |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|       | | :class:`allowed_missing`,          |                            |
|       | | :class:`allowed_extra`,            |                            |
|       | | :class:`allowed_invalid`,          |                            |
|   4   | | :class:`allowed_keys`,             | Element-wise allowances    |
|       | | :class:`allowed_args`,             |                            |
|       | | :class:`allowed_deviation`,        |                            |
|       | | :class:`allowed_percent_deviation` |                            |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   5   | | :class:`allowed_specific`          | Group-wise allowances      |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   6   | | :class:`allowed_limit`             | Whole-error allowances     |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+


************
Loading Data
************

.. autoclass:: working_directory


.. autoclass:: get_reader(obj, *args, **kwds)

    .. automethod:: from_csv

    .. automethod:: from_dicts

    .. automethod:: from_namedtuples

    .. automethod:: from_query

    .. automethod:: from_pandas

    .. automethod:: from_excel

    .. automethod:: from_dbf


***************************
Selecting and Querying Data
***************************

.. autoclass:: Selector

    .. autoattribute:: fieldnames

    .. automethod:: __call__


.. class:: Query(columns, **where)
           Query(selector, columns, **where)

    A class to query data from a source object. Queries can be
    created, modified, and passed around without actually computing
    the result---computation doesn't occur until the query object
    itself or its :meth:`fetch` method is called.

    The *columns* argument must be a container of one field name (a
    string) or of an inner-container of multiple filed names. The
    optional *where* keywords can narrow a selection to rows where
    fields match specified values.

    Although Query objects are usually created by
    :meth:`calling <datatest.Selector.__call__>` an existing
    Selector object like a function, it's possible to create
    them independent of any single data source::

        query = Query('A')

    .. automethod:: from_object

    .. automethod:: sum

    .. automethod:: count

    .. automethod:: avg

    .. automethod:: min

    .. automethod:: max

    .. automethod:: distinct

    .. automethod:: apply

    .. automethod:: map

    .. automethod:: filter

    .. automethod:: reduce

    .. automethod:: fetch

    .. automethod:: __call__


.. autoclass:: Result

    .. attribute:: evaluation_type

        The type of instance returned by the
        :meth:`fetch <Result.fetch>` method.

    .. automethod:: fetch

    .. attribute:: __wrapped__

        The underlying iterator---useful when introspecting
        or rewrapping.

Commit message:

Add type-matching predicate from external code base and update documentation.

docs/reference/core-api.rst, after:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: datatest API
    :keywords: datatest, API, reference


######################
Datatest API Reference
######################


**********
Validation
**********

.. autofunction:: validate

.. autofunction:: valid


.. _predicates:

**********
Predicates
**********

Datatest uses "predicate objects" to check that values satisfy a
certain criteria. The specific behavior of a predicate depends
on its type:

    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | Predicate type       | Checks that                              |
    +======================+==========================================+
    | set                  | value is a member of the set             |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | function             | calling ``function(value)`` returns True |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | type                 | value is an instance of the type         |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | re.compile(pattern)  | value matches the regular expression     |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | str or non-container | value equals predicate                   |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | tuple of             | tuple of values satisfies corresponding  |
    | predicates           | tuple of predicates                      |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+
    | "``...``" (an        | (used as a wildcard, matches any value)  |
    | ellipsis)            |                                          |
    +----------------------+------------------------------------------+

Predicates are used as arguments when asserting validity and
allowing differences. For some examples, see the following
table:

    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | Example Predicate         | Example Value  | Matches |
    +===========================+================+=========+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``'A'``        | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     {'A', 'B'}            | ``'C'``        | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``4``          | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     def iseven(x):        | ``9``          | No      |
    |         return x % 2 == 0 |                |         |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``1.0``        | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     float                 | ``1``          | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``'bake'``     | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     re.compile('[bc]ake') | ``'cake'``     | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |                           | ``'fake'``     | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``'foo'``      | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     'foo'                 | ``'bar'``      | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+
    | .. code-block:: python    | ``('A', 'X')`` | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    |     ('A', ...)            | ``('A', 'Y')`` | Yes     |
    |                           +----------------+---------+
    | Uses ellipsis wildcard.   | ``('B', 'X')`` | No      |
    +---------------------------+----------------+---------+


******
Errors
******

.. autoexception:: ValidationError

    .. autoattribute:: message

    .. autoattribute:: differences


***********
Differences
***********

.. autoclass:: BaseDifference

    .. autoattribute:: args


.. autoclass:: Missing


.. autoclass:: Extra


.. autoclass:: Invalid

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Invalid.invalid
       :annotation:

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Invalid.expected
       :annotation:


.. autoclass:: Deviation

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Deviation.deviation
       :annotation:

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Deviation.expected
       :annotation:


**********
Allowances
**********

.. autoclass:: allowed_missing


.. autoclass:: allowed_extra


.. autoclass:: allowed_invalid


.. autoclass:: allowed_keys


.. autoclass:: allowed_args


.. class:: allowed_deviation(tolerance, /, msg=None)
           allowed_deviation(lower, upper, msg=None)

    Allows numeric :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>`
    within a given *tolerance* without triggering a test
    failure::

        with datatest.allowed_deviation(5):  # tolerance of +/- 5
            datatest.validate(..., ...)

    Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds::

        with datatest.allowed_deviation(-2, 3):  # tolerance from -2 to +3
            datatest.validate(..., ...)

    Deviations within the given range are suppressed while those
    outside the range will trigger a test failure.

    Empty values (None, empty string, etc.) are treated as zeros
    when performing comparisons.


.. class:: allowed_percent_deviation(tolerance, /, msg=None)
           allowed_percent_deviation(lower, upper, msg=None)

    Allows :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` with
    percentages of error within a given *tolerance* without
    triggering a test failure::

        with datatest.allowed_percent_deviation(0.03):  # tolerance of +/- 3%
            datatest.validate(..., ...)

    Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds::

        with datatest.allowed_percent_deviation(-0.02, 0.01):  # tolerance from -2% to +1%
            datatest.validate(..., ...)

    Deviations within the given range are suppressed while those
    outside the range will trigger a test failure.

    Empty values (None, empty string, etc.) are treated as zeros
    when performing comparisons.


.. autoclass:: allowed_specific


.. autoclass:: allowed_limit


Composability
=============

Allowances can be combined to create new allowances with modified
behavior.

The ``&`` operator can be used to create an *intersection* of
allowance criteria. In the following example, :class:`allowed_missing`
and :class:`allowed_limit` are combined into a single allowance that
accepts up to five :class:`Missing` differences::

    with allowed_missing() & allowed_limit(5):
        validate(..., ...)

The ``|`` operator can be used to create *union* of allowance
criteria. In the following example, :class:`allowed_deviation`
and :class:`allowed_percent` are combined into a single allowance
that accepts :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` of ±10
as well as :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` of ±5%::

    with allowed_deviation(10) | allowed_percent(0.05):
        validate(..., ...)

And composed allowances, thsemselves, can be composed to define
increasingly specific allowance criteria::

    five_missing = allowed_missing() & allowed_limit(5)

    minor_deviations = allowed_deviation(10) | allowed_percent(0.05)

    with five_missing | minor_deviations:
        validate(..., ...)


Order of Operations
-------------------

Allowance composition uses the following order of
operations---shown from highest precedence to lowest
precedence. Operations with the same precedence level
(appearing in the same cell) are evaluated from left
to right.

+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Order | Operation                            | Description                |
+=======+======================================+============================+
|   1   | | ``()``                             | Parentheses                |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   2   | | ``&``                              | Bitwise AND (intersection) |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   3   | | ``|``                              | Bitwise OR (union)         |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|       | | :class:`allowed_missing`,          |                            |
|       | | :class:`allowed_extra`,            |                            |
|       | | :class:`allowed_invalid`,          |                            |
|   4   | | :class:`allowed_keys`,             | Element-wise allowances    |
|       | | :class:`allowed_args`,             |                            |
|       | | :class:`allowed_deviation`,        |                            |
|       | | :class:`allowed_percent_deviation` |                            |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   5   | | :class:`allowed_specific`          | Group-wise allowances      |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   6   | | :class:`allowed_limit`             | Whole-error allowances     |
+-------+--------------------------------------+----------------------------+


************
Loading Data
************

.. autoclass:: working_directory


.. autoclass:: get_reader(obj, *args, **kwds)

    .. automethod:: from_csv

    .. automethod:: from_dicts

    .. automethod:: from_namedtuples

    .. automethod:: from_query

    .. automethod:: from_pandas

    .. automethod:: from_excel

    .. automethod:: from_dbf


***************************
Selecting and Querying Data
***************************

.. autoclass:: Selector

    .. autoattribute:: fieldnames

    .. automethod:: __call__


.. class:: Query(columns, **where)
           Query(selector, columns, **where)

    A class to query data from a source object. Queries can be
    created, modified, and passed around without actually computing
    the result---computation doesn't occur until the query object
    itself or its :meth:`fetch` method is called.

    The *columns* argument must be a container of one field name (a
    string) or of an inner-container of multiple filed names. The
    optional *where* keywords can narrow a selection to rows where
    fields match specified values.

    Although Query objects are usually created by
    :meth:`calling <datatest.Selector.__call__>` an existing
    Selector object like a function, it's possible to create
    them independent of any single data source::

        query = Query('A')

    .. automethod:: from_object

    .. automethod:: sum

    .. automethod:: count

    .. automethod:: avg

    .. automethod:: min

    .. automethod:: max

    .. automethod:: distinct

    .. automethod:: apply

    .. automethod:: map

    .. automethod:: filter

    .. automethod:: reduce

    .. automethod:: fetch

    .. automethod:: __call__


.. autoclass:: Result

    .. attribute:: evaluation_type

        The type of instance returned by the
        :meth:`fetch <Result.fetch>` method.

    .. automethod:: fetch

    .. attribute:: __wrapped__

        The underlying iterator---useful when introspecting
        or rewrapping.
