docs/reference/datatest-core.rst, before:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: Datatest Core API Reference
    :keywords: datatest, API, reference


###########################
Datatest Core API Reference
###########################


**********
Validation
**********

.. autoclassinstance:: validate

    In addition to :class:`validate()`'s default behavior, the following
    methods can be used to specify additional validation behaviors.

    .. automethod:: predicate

    .. automethod:: approx

    .. automethod:: fuzzy

    .. automethod:: interval

    .. automethod:: set

    .. automethod:: subset

    .. automethod:: superset

    .. automethod:: unique

    .. automethod:: order

    .. note::

        Calling :class:`validate()` or its methods will either raise an
        exception or pass without error. To get an explicit True/False
        return value, use the :func:`valid` function instead.


.. autofunction:: valid


.. autoexception:: ValidationError

    .. autoattribute:: differences

    .. autoattribute:: description


.. _difference-docs:

***********
Differences
***********

.. autoclass:: BaseDifference

    .. autoattribute:: args


Concrete Differences
====================

.. autoclass:: Missing


.. autoclass:: Extra


.. autoclass:: Invalid

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Invalid.invalid
       :annotation:

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Invalid.expected
       :annotation:


.. autoclass:: Deviation

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Deviation.deviation
       :annotation:

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Deviation.expected
       :annotation:


.. _allowance-docs:

**********
Allowances
**********

Allowances are context managers that operate on a :class:`ValidationError`'s
collection of differences.

.. autoclass:: allowed

    .. automethod:: missing

    .. automethod:: extra

    .. automethod:: invalid

    .. automethod:: keys

    .. automethod:: args

    .. automethod:: fuzzy

    .. classmethod:: deviation(tolerance, /, msg=None)
                     deviation(lower, upper, msg=None)

        Allows numeric :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>`
        within a given *tolerance* without triggering a test
        failure:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 7

            from datatest import validate, allowed

            data = {'A': 45, 'B': 205}

            requirement = {'A': 50, 'B': 200}

            with allowed.deviation(5):  # <- tolerance of ±5
                validate(data, requirement)  # raises dictionary
                                             # {'A': Deviation(-5, 50),
                                             #  'B': Deviation(+5, 200)}

        Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 1

            with allowed.deviation(-2, 7):  # <- tolerance from -2 to +7
                validate(..., ...)

        Deviations within the given range are suppressed while those
        outside the range will trigger a test failure.

        Empty values (None, empty string, etc.) are treated as zeros
        when performing comparisons.


    .. classmethod:: percent(tolerance, /, msg=None)
                     percent(lower, upper, msg=None)

        Allows :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` with
        percentages of error within a given *tolerance* without
        triggering a test failure:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 7

            from datatest import validate, allowed

            data = {'A': 47, 'B': 212}

            requirement = {'A': 50, 'B': 200}

            with allowed.percent(0.06):  # <- tolerance of ±6%
                validate(data, requirement)  # raises dictionary
                                             # {'A': Deviation(-3, 50),
                                             #  'B': Deviation(+12, 200)}

        Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 1

            with allowed.percent(-0.02, 0.01):  # <- tolerance from -2% to +1%
                validate(..., ...)

        Deviations within the given range are suppressed while those
        outside the range will trigger a test failure.

        Empty values (None, empty string, etc.) are treated as zeros
        when performing comparisons.


    .. automethod:: percent_deviation


    .. automethod:: specific


    .. automethod:: limit


Composability
=============

Allowances can be combined to create new allowances with modified
behavior.

The ``&`` operator can be used to create an *intersection* of
allowance criteria. In the following example, :meth:`allowed.missing`
and :meth:`allowed.limit` are combined into a single allowance that
accepts up to five Missing differences:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 3

    from datatest import validate, allowed

    with allowed.missing() & allowed.limit(5):
        validate(..., ...)

The ``|`` operator can be used to create *union* of allowance
criteria. In the following example, :meth:`allowed.deviation`
and :meth:`allowed.percent` are combined into a single allowance
that accepts Deviations of ±10 as well as Deviations of ±5%:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 3

    from datatest import validate, allowed

    with allowed.deviation(10) | allowed.percent(0.05):
        validate(..., ...)

And composed allowances, themselves, can be composed to define
increasingly specific criteria:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 7

    from datatest import validate, allowed

    five_missing = allowed.missing() & allowed.limit(5)

    minor_deviations = allowed.deviation(10) | allowed.percent(0.05)

    with five_missing | minor_deviations:
        validate(..., ...)


Order of Operations
===================

Allowance composition uses the following order of
operations---shown from highest precedence to lowest
precedence. Operations with the same precedence level
(appearing in the same cell) are evaluated from left
to right.

+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Order | Operation                     | Description                |
+=======+===============================+============================+
|   1   | | ``()``                      | Parentheses                |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   2   | | ``&``                       | Bitwise AND (intersection) |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   3   | | ``|``                       | Bitwise OR (union)         |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|       | | :meth:`allowed.missing`,    |                            |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.extra`,      |                            |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.invalid`,    |                            |
|   4   | | :meth:`allowed.keys`,       | Element-wise allowances    |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.args`,       |                            |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.deviation`,  |                            |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.percent`     |                            |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   5   | | :meth:`allowed.specific`    | Group-wise allowances      |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   6   | | :meth:`allowed.limit`       | Whole-error allowances     |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+


.. _predicate-docs:

**********
Predicates
**********

Datatest can use :class:`Predicate` objects for validation, certain
allowances, and querying data.

.. autoclass:: Predicate

Commit message:

Change module name and language from "allowance" to "acceptance".
Some background:

Initially there was very little overlap between the behavior of validation
methods and "allowance" methods. But as the methods have been refined and
expanded, we now have cases like validate.approx/allowed.deviation and
validate.fuzzy/allowed.fuzzy. The validation method should be used when
the variation is intentional and the "allowance" should be used when the
variation is unintentional.

This use of "allowance" for unintentional variation is counter to
existing manufacturing and engineering vocabulary. But the word choice
was made intentionally because "accept" is sounds very similar to the
Python reserved word "except" and I wanted to clearly separate these two
concepts to facilitate discussing test code.

The growing overlap between validation methods and "allowance" methods
has brought this issue to the foreground. The need to clarify their use
is now important enough that I think it's worth having the near-homonym
of "accept" and "except".

docs/reference/datatest-core.rst, after:


.. module:: datatest

.. meta::
    :description: Datatest Core API Reference
    :keywords: datatest, API, reference


###########################
Datatest Core API Reference
###########################


**********
Validation
**********

.. autoclassinstance:: validate

    In addition to :class:`validate()`'s default behavior, the following
    methods can be used to specify additional validation behaviors.

    .. automethod:: predicate

    .. automethod:: approx

    .. automethod:: fuzzy

    .. automethod:: interval

    .. automethod:: set

    .. automethod:: subset

    .. automethod:: superset

    .. automethod:: unique

    .. automethod:: order

    .. note::

        Calling :class:`validate()` or its methods will either raise an
        exception or pass without error. To get an explicit True/False
        return value, use the :func:`valid` function instead.


.. autofunction:: valid


.. autoexception:: ValidationError

    .. autoattribute:: differences

    .. autoattribute:: description


.. _difference-docs:

***********
Differences
***********

.. autoclass:: BaseDifference

    .. autoattribute:: args


Concrete Differences
====================

.. autoclass:: Missing


.. autoclass:: Extra


.. autoclass:: Invalid

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Invalid.invalid
       :annotation:

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Invalid.expected
       :annotation:


.. autoclass:: Deviation

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Deviation.deviation
       :annotation:

    .. autoinstanceattribute:: datatest.difference.Deviation.expected
       :annotation:


.. _acceptance-docs:

***********
Acceptances
***********

Acceptances are context managers that operate on a :class:`ValidationError`'s
collection of differences.

.. autoclass:: allowed

    .. automethod:: missing

    .. automethod:: extra

    .. automethod:: invalid

    .. automethod:: keys

    .. automethod:: args

    .. automethod:: fuzzy

    .. classmethod:: deviation(tolerance, /, msg=None)
                     deviation(lower, upper, msg=None)

        Allows numeric :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>`
        within a given *tolerance* without triggering a test
        failure:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 7

            from datatest import validate, allowed

            data = {'A': 45, 'B': 205}

            requirement = {'A': 50, 'B': 200}

            with allowed.deviation(5):  # <- tolerance of ±5
                validate(data, requirement)  # raises dictionary
                                             # {'A': Deviation(-5, 50),
                                             #  'B': Deviation(+5, 200)}

        Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 1

            with allowed.deviation(-2, 7):  # <- tolerance from -2 to +7
                validate(..., ...)

        Deviations within the given range are suppressed while those
        outside the range will trigger a test failure.

        Empty values (None, empty string, etc.) are treated as zeros
        when performing comparisons.


    .. classmethod:: percent(tolerance, /, msg=None)
                     percent(lower, upper, msg=None)

        Allows :class:`Deviations <datatest.Deviation>` with
        percentages of error within a given *tolerance* without
        triggering a test failure:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 7

            from datatest import validate, allowed

            data = {'A': 47, 'B': 212}

            requirement = {'A': 50, 'B': 200}

            with allowed.percent(0.06):  # <- tolerance of ±6%
                validate(data, requirement)  # raises dictionary
                                             # {'A': Deviation(-3, 50),
                                             #  'B': Deviation(+12, 200)}

        Specifying different *lower* and *upper* bounds:

        .. code-block:: python
            :emphasize-lines: 1

            with allowed.percent(-0.02, 0.01):  # <- tolerance from -2% to +1%
                validate(..., ...)

        Deviations within the given range are suppressed while those
        outside the range will trigger a test failure.

        Empty values (None, empty string, etc.) are treated as zeros
        when performing comparisons.


    .. automethod:: percent_deviation


    .. automethod:: specific


    .. automethod:: limit


Composability
=============

Acceptances can be combined to create new acceptances with modified
behavior.

The ``&`` operator can be used to create an *intersection* of
acceptance criteria. In the following example, :meth:`allowed.missing`
and :meth:`allowed.limit` are combined into a single acceptance that
allows up to five Missing differences:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 3

    from datatest import validate, allowed

    with allowed.missing() & allowed.limit(5):
        validate(..., ...)

The ``|`` operator can be used to create *union* of acceptance
criteria. In the following example, :meth:`allowed.deviation`
and :meth:`allowed.percent` are combined into a single acceptance
that accepts Deviations of ±10 as well as Deviations of ±5%:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 3

    from datatest import validate, allowed

    with allowed.deviation(10) | allowed.percent(0.05):
        validate(..., ...)

And composed acceptances, themselves, can be composed to define
increasingly specific criteria:

.. code-block:: python
    :emphasize-lines: 7

    from datatest import validate, allowed

    five_missing = allowed.missing() & allowed.limit(5)

    minor_deviations = allowed.deviation(10) | allowed.percent(0.05)

    with five_missing | minor_deviations:
        validate(..., ...)


Order of Operations
===================

Acceptance composition uses the following order of
operations---shown from highest precedence to lowest
precedence. Operations with the same precedence level
(appearing in the same cell) are evaluated from left
to right.

+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Order | Operation                     | Description                |
+=======+===============================+============================+
|   1   | | ``()``                      | Parentheses                |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   2   | | ``&``                       | Bitwise AND (intersection) |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   3   | | ``|``                       | Bitwise OR (union)         |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|       | | :meth:`allowed.missing`,    |                            |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.extra`,      |                            |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.invalid`,    |                            |
|   4   | | :meth:`allowed.keys`,       | Element-wise acceptances   |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.args`,       |                            |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.deviation`,  |                            |
|       | | :meth:`allowed.percent`     |                            |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   5   | | :meth:`allowed.specific`    | Group-wise acceptances     |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+
|   6   | | :meth:`allowed.limit`       | Whole-error acceptances    |
+-------+-------------------------------+----------------------------+


.. _predicate-docs:

**********
Predicates
**********

Datatest can use :class:`Predicate` objects for validation, certain
acceptances, and querying data.

.. autoclass:: Predicate
